federalist 68
the mode of electing the president
from the new york packet
friday march 14
hamilton
to the people of the state of new york
the mode of appointment of the chief
magistrate of the united states is
almost the only part of the system of
any consequence which has escaped
without severe censure or which has
received the slightest mark of
approbation from its opponents
the most plausible of these who has
appeared in print has even deigned to
admit that the election of the president
is pretty well guarded read a federal
farmer
i venture somewhat further and hesitate
not to affirm that if the manner of it
be not perfect it is at least excellent
it unites in an imminent degree all the
advantages the union of which was to be
wished for
it was desirable that the sense of the
people should operate in the choice of
the person to whom so important to trust
was to be confided this end will be
answered by committing the right of
making it not to any pre-established
body but to men chosen by the people for
the special purpose and at the
particular conjunction
it was equally desirable that the
immediate election should be made by men
most capable of analyzing the qualities
adapted to the station and acting under
circumstances favorable to deliberation
and to a judicious combination of all
the reasons and inducements which were
proper to govern their choice
a small number of persons selected by
their fellow citizens from the general
mass will be most likely to possess the
information and discernment requisite to
such complicated investigations
it was also peculiarly desirable to
afford as little opportunity as possible
to tumult and disorder this evil was not
least to be dreaded in the election of a
magistrate who was to have so important
an agency in the administration of the
government as the president of the
united states but the precautions which
have been so happily concerted in the
system under consideration promising
effectual security against this mischief
the choice of several to form an
intermediate body of electors will be
much less apt to convulse the community
with any extraordinary or violent
movements than the choice of one who was
himself to be the final object of the
public wishes and as the electors chosen
in each state are to assemble and vote
in the state in which they are chosen
this detached and divided situation will
expose them much less to heats and
ferments which might be communicated
from them to the people than if they
were all to be convened at one time in
one place
nothing was more to be desired than that
every practicable obstacle should be
opposed to cabal intrigue and corruption
these most deadly adversaries of
republican government might naturally
have been expected to make their
approaches from more than one quarter
but chiefly from the desire in foreign
powers to gain an improper ascendant in
our councils
how could they better gratify this than
by raising a creature of their own to
the chief magistracy of the union but
the convention have guarded against all
danger of this sword with the most
prominent and judicious attention they
have not made the appointment of the
president to depend on any pre-existing
bodies of men who might be tampered with
beforehand to prostitute their votes but
they have referred it in the first
instance to an immediate act of the
people of america to be exerted in the
choice of persons for the temporary and
sole purpose of making the appointment
and they have excluded from eligibility
to this trust all those who from
situation might be suspected of too
great devotion to the president in
office no senator representative or
other person holding a place of trust or
profit under the united states can be of
the numbers of the electors thus without
corrupting the body of the people the
immediate agents in the election will at
least enter upon the task free from any
sinister bias their transient existence
and their detached situation already
taken notice of afford a satisfactory
prospect of their continuing so to the
conclusion of it
the business of corruption when it is to
embrace so considerable a number of men
requires time as well as means nor would
it be found easy suddenly to embark them
dispersed as they would be over 13
states in any combinations founded upon
motives which though they could not
properly be denominated corrupt might
yet be of a nature to mislead them from
their duty
another and no less important
deciduratum was that the executive
should be independent for his
continuance in office on all but the
people themselves he might otherwise be
tempted to sacrifice his duty to his
complacence for those whose favor was
necessary to the duration of his
official consequence
this advantage will also be secured by
making his re-election to depend on a
special body of representatives deputed
by the society for the single purpose of
making the important choice
all these advantages will happily
combine in the plan devised by the
convention which is that the number of
each state shall choose a number of
persons as electors equal to the number
of senators and representatives of such
state in the national government who
shall assemble within the state and vote
for some fit person as president
their votes thus given are to be
transmitted to the seat of the national
government and the person who may happen
to have a majority of the whole number
of votes will be the president
but as a majority of the votes might not
always happen to center in one man and
as it might be unsafe to permit less
than a majority to be conclusive it is
provided that in such a contingency the
house of representatives shall select
out of the candidates who shall have the
five highest number of votes the man who
in their opinion may be best qualified
for the office
the process of election affords a moral
certainty that the office of president
will never fall to the lot of any man
who is not in an imminent degree endowed
with the requisite qualifications
talents for low intrigue and little arts
of popularity may alone suffice to
elevate a man to the first honors in a
single state but it will require other
talents and a different kind of merit to
establish him in the esteem and
confidence of the whole union or of so
considerable a portion of it as would be
necessary to make him a successful
candidate for the distinguished office
of president of the united states it
will not be too strong to say that there
will be a constant probability of seeing
the station filled by characters
preeminent for ability and virtue and
this will be thought no inconsiderable
recommendation of the constitution by
those who are able to estimate the share
which the executive in every government
must necessarily have in its good or ill
administration though we cannot
acquiesce in the political heresy of the
poet who says for forms of government
let fools contest that which is best
administered is best yet we may safely
pronounce that the true test of a good
government is its aptitude and tendency
to produce a good administration
the vice president is to be chosen in
the same manner with the president with
this difference that the senate is to do
in respect to the former what is to be
done by the house of representatives in
respect to the latter
the appointment of an extraordinary
person as vice president has been
objected to as superfluous if not
mischievous
it has been alleged that it would have
been preferable to have authorized the
senate to elect out of their own body
and officer answering that description
but two considerations seem to justify
the ideas of the convention in this
respect
one is that to secure at all times the
possibility of a definite resolution of
the body it is necessary that the
president should have only a casting
vote and to take the senator of any
state from his seat as senator to place
him in that of president of the senate
would be to exchange in regard to the
state from which he came a constant for
a contingent vote
the other consideration is that as the
vice president may occasionally become a
substitute for the president in the
supreme executive magistracy all the
reasons which recommend the mode of
election prescribed for the one apply
with great if not with equal force to
the manner of appointing the other
it is remarkable that in this as in most
other instances the objection which is
made would lie against the constitution
of this state we have a lieutenant
governor chosen by the people at large
who presides in the senate and is the
constitutional substitute for the
governor in casualties similar to those
which would authorize the vice president
to exercise the authorities and
discharge the duties of the president
publius